before we dive into the truth about
cancer being metabolic and not genetic
Dr C freed what are the lifestyle
behaviors that contribute to cancer
growth meaning do these things if you
want to get cancer yeah right we that it
sounds like a uh it sounds like a crazy
crazy question uh why why would anyone
want to do anything that would uh
enhance their chances to have a group of
in some organ of their body growing out
of control uh with a potential to kill
them right this is the so um and and and
these are the things that that you would
do uh if you wanted to do that and when
you when you find out what you need to
do to get a lethal
cancer uh you might want to try to avoid
those things right makes sense so if
you're know what you need to do to get
cancer then you might want to consider
avoiding those things and when you
realize that what you have to avoid will
require a massive change in diet and
lifestyle uh then you say well I don't
want to do that therefore that must mean
you would like to have cancer right you
see what I'm saying yeah all right so as
I said um what you need to do and it's
never one thing it's probably the whole
package you got to have the whole
package here as I said don't
exercise um avoid it avoid any kind of
uh exercise um the couch potato
mentality becomes the dominant way of
looking at your life as I said never
take stairs always take the elevator um
never leave the car in a fast food place
God forbid you leave the car and walk in
and pick something up you must sit in
the car so they can hand it through you
the window um never exercise never run
never walk never lift weights um
you know what what you call just Shuffle
around if you have to get somewhere um
the most minimal level of exercise uh is
will put you at risk for cancer um the
worst kind of foods you have to eat
large amounts of Highly processed foods
um things that can live in a package
like these uh uh Hostess Twinkies that I
have here um I use them in my class uh
as props I bought these in 2010 wow uh
when the when they said Hostess was
going out of business wow look what they
they look like you just them yeah they
look brand new they they they have
they're a little stale uh but a mouse
broke in and ate one um not long ago and
and if you look at the Box they have
more a list of ingredients you need a a
degree of some sort to figure out the
chemicals that are in this delicious uh
eat a lot eat a lot of these got to eat
these like three or four times a day uh
or similar kinds of things um that are
that can REM remain in the package for
decades um as I said avoid any avoid any
Fresh
Foods uh never eat anything that's
organically grown uh whether it's a
vegetable organic grass-fed free range
chickens grass-fed avoid that uh always
always eat the most highly processed
foods and eat a lot of it too don't just
nibble on it you know engorge yourself
with this kind of thing while you're not
EX exing you have to eat massive amounts
of Highly processed uh foods that have
incredibly long shelf lives um make sure
you have a lot of emotional stress in
your life always be freaked out about
everything EV uh everything that you
hear gets you angry and upset no matter
what it is you got to have a lot of
emotional stress a lot of anger um while
you're eating the highly processed foods
and not exercising you know you and if
you can smoke if if you can you know
Chew Tobacco or smoke it uh really good
really good that'll while you're chowing
down on a Twinkie you know uh um these
are the kinds of things make sure you
don't sleep well at night God forbid you
get a good night's sleep no no no you
must be awoken several times with anger
and bitterness and or emotional stress
um this is this is helpful to get to get
cancer and make sure you don't enjoy
life make sure you have no happiness in
your life um so you put all these things
together and there's a real good chance
that you can get cancer so when you hear
what I said to get cancer um you would
do the opposite to try to avoid cancer
but when you realize that many of the
things that I've mentioned people are
already doing they're not exercising
they're freaked out uh they're under
stress they're not getting good sleep
and then they wake up and they go we we
have a an obesity epidemic uh uh which
is linked to type two diabetes and uh
obesity and systemic inflammation and
diabetes puts you at risk for cancer so
in know if you're eating a lot a lot of
Highly processed foods and not
exercising you can put the risk of
getting di diabetes and obesity so uh
you put it all together and cancer is
exploding in our societies predominantly
for the reasons that I that I I just
articulated and if people really were
fearful of what I just said and said
whoa I got to do something different uh
did they not know this uh did they is
this the first time they ever heard what
I just said a lot of them know this
people still smoke well I'm not the one
that's going to get the lung cancer no
but you could get empyema and a heart
attack that'll kill you also um but but
I think it's our diet lifestyle that put
us at risk um for cancer predominantly
diet lifestyle and this is exploding
over the last 50 years because we're
getting more and more international
foods that are uh what we call Global
the global food food distribution across
the planet um more and more highly
processed foods are appearing on shelves
everything got to have a lot of carbs
too make sure the foods if you want
cancer you got to have a lot of
carbohydrate in that food a lot of
chemicals too God forbid anything is
natural um so you eat a lot of that
stuff don't exercise smoke a lot
horrible night sleep and uh we'll be
very surprised if you don't get cancer
but every now and then you get people
who absolutely abused themselves for
decades they smoke cigarettes they don't
exercise
they eat the worst foods and they're
always like happy you know they're not
so unhappy sometimes so I think you have
to put all those together in a package
and that puts you at risk but not only
for cancer it's also obesity type two
diabetes dementia cardiovascular disease
almost the whole range of what we call
chronic diseases so um uh and then and
then when person gets cancer uh what can
you do for me and that's when we come in
with the hype with the powerful poison
and radiation and all this other stuffff
you take an already sick person and you
blast the hell out of them with poisons
and radiation and cical Surgical
mutilations and there by the grace of
God they survive um so the system is
kind of screwed up if you ask me yeah
wow so that that's the recipe right
there if you if you want to develop
cancer like that is the perfect recipe
don't exercise be sedentary eat the
processed foods high carbohydrate Foods
the seed oils the artificial ingredient
have emotional stress get triggered by
everybody get triggered by everything
get bad sleep get poor sleep wake up
feeling tired rinse and repeat right
that that's going yeah and do it every
day do it every day for months year in
and year out you know what's amazing
that most people unfortunately live that
sort of Lifestyle here in the United
States and and that's why the CDC says
one in three women are diagnosed with
cancer within their lifetime for men one
and two and what's surprising to me is
even though we do so many things wrong
and we take so many hits with our
lifestyle poor lifestyle decisions how
incredibly strong the human body is like
you mentioned the chemotherapy like even
going through something like that and
then overcoming it it just blows my mind
that we're not and I'm saying this in
the kind amazing way we're not just
dropping dead every single day from all
the hits that we take our human body is
so resilient even with all the crap that
we do to each
other yeah well we we we evolved over
over hundreds and hundreds of thousands
of years one they called environmental
forcing Rick pots of the uh Smithsonian
institution uh wrote some really good
books about this uh our species has
survived some of the most horrific
stresses um that you could possibly
imagine uh our ability to colonize the
most horrific environments uh very dry
arid uh rainforest freezing ice flows um
when you consider uh with minimal food
and uh you know you you had to eek out
an existence on what the environment
would offer you and it required
tremendous amounts of energy exercise uh
there was no processed carbohydrates in
our in our environment um everything was
natural and organic but but boy I tell
you it was a tough way to live and and
uh what was killing most Folks at that
time and we know this from from looking
at Aboriginal folks that are on the
planet today uh was was most mostly
injuries and infections so in our
paleolith lithic ancestors would mostly
die from injuries and infections uh they
didn't have orthopedic surgeons to fix
hips and broken bones and this kind of
thing we didn't have antibiotics so you
had to rely on the power of your own
immune system uh and your ability to
continue to to hunt and walk with a with
a with a broken limb or a broken hip and
it couldn't have been easy um and
eventually your body just gets worn down
from the stress of the living living but
we've we've uh evolved we've eliminated
a lot of these kinds of health issues we
have tremendous ability to enhance our
immune system with antibiotics to
prevent infections and how many people
are are walking I I had a hip
replacement it's unbelievable uh you
feel good you can walk your exercise
goes way up you're not pained every time
you have to do something so so clearly
those are major advances in our Medical
Technology but the same time we have
made we have allowed chronic diseases to
replace uh uh these acute problems of
infections and injuries and now we die
slowly uh from uh dementia
cardiovascular disease cancer type two
diabetes I mean all of these just wear
your body down but getting back to your
question about how how hard it is to get
cancer there's an interesting study that
was published maybe 30 years ago go on
monkeys the macac monkey um where they
took chem chemical tar um with a a
carcinogenic tar and and rubbed it on
the the skin of the monkey uh for 10
years because they wanted to develop
tumors in monkeys because monkeys are
genetically more similar to because they
wanted to develop tumors in monkeys
because and uh they took these maak
monkeys and they rub tar on their on
their arms and no tumor and then finally
they
started to inject the chemical
carcinogens into the monkeys so um and
for 10 years they had like in this 60 or
70 monkey group they had like one monkey
that had some minor lymphoma um so they
cancelled the project uh saying monkeys
are not a good model for
cancer now what they what they failed to
do in that experiment was to feed the
monkeys Twinkies every day and
may put them and have a lion or a tiger
walk around the cage three times put the
fear of God into them uh do all the
kinds of things that would have give
them emotional stress nutrition stress
don't let them sleep well at night you
know uh do all the things that I just
said um they didn't do that so you're
you're you're 100% correct how hard it
is for us to get cancer you really have
to abuse your body something fierce for
decades and and people think um oh you
know get a lot of exercise and I still
got cancer yeah but what about all the
other things that you're subjected to um
and we're saying it's not one thing it's
like the package yeah the whole package
puts you at at risk but even doing uh a
lot of exercise will reduce the risk all
of these things you don't smoke you
reduce risk uh you enjoy life you reduce
risk you have Stress Management you you
reduce risk so so again uh you you look
at this but there's a there's a linkage
now between obesity and cancer uh the
more obese the more likely you're going
to be of cancer but that's because your
body is inflamed inflammation damages
mitochondria as I said it's very
difficult to get cancer when your
mitochondria and your body remain
healthy uh they are they are the the the
controllers of our destiny the health of
the mitochondria in our body determine
how long you will live and the level of
of quality of life that you will have as
the result of this organel that exists
in almost all cells except arthr sites
um so so yeah if you want to abuse your
body I know seed oils take anything you
want to jam it chug on it you know it's
just uh with all the other things uh but
most people don't want to do that right
but yet they do it but they don't want
to do it so uh and I'm not the one to
tell people what to do or what not to do
uh in anything I mean let them do I'm
just saying what what causes the risk
factors that will put will cause
disregulated cell growth in a population
of cells in a particular organ of your
body yeah you're giving us the
information and we decide what we want
to do with it you know it is interesting
how you said earlier that people know
that smoking cigarettes for example or
chewing tobacco is not healthy for them
but they think that's not going to be me
I'm not going to be the one to get
cancer what do you think that is you
know I have a thought behind this that
people do their sedentary they eat the
processed foods they eat the junk food
they smoke they have bad lifestyle
behaviors I think that they when they
when you lack a purpose and lack goals
in your life there's a void that you
feel this was my life for 20 years
there's a void you feel with these
dopamine producing activities and you're
not thinking about the long term you're
thinking about how I could fill this
void and and get some dopamine hits
right now do you think a part of that
that's going on people just lack goals
they lack community and they're just
filling this void with these habits I
don't know I I can't I can't address
that don't forget our our research is on
the on the biochemical mechanisms by
which by which disregulated cell growth
happens uh at the biochemical level
whether human behavior will change I
mean you can go on for hours and look at
every kind of a and not have a a clear
uh controlled experiment to test any one
of these kinds of things but but there's
enough circumstantial evidence in the
scientific L literature to uh know what
it what puts you at risk and doesn't
that that what I what I'm confronted
with since prevention since many many
folks not all of course
don't really care about prevention like
you said you know what after I get the
problem what what can you do for me at
that point yes I know I should have been
a better person I shouldn't have avoided
these things but I didn't and I got this
so that's where the that's where our
research comes in um okay uh you have
this disregulated cell growth now how do
we manage it without toxicity how can we
control uh or restrict the ability of
that group of cells uh to not get out of
control and kill you um our research
doesn't doesn't say we cure cancer at
all what we say is we can manage it and
and if you if it never returns for for
decades and you die from something other
than cancer then only then can you say
you were cured um but a lot of people
don't know that oh I want to be cured
well I'm sorry um that cannot be
guaranteed by the medical establishment
either right um you know when they say
oh yeah know you're 5 years survival it
means you're cured and then five and a
half years you get another kind of tumor
something what well what's going on with
that so um yeah I I think you know let's
put it this way how long can I live on
the planet with a higher quality of life
than I had before and uh even though I
know I have this and it's up to you once
you know what to do and how to do it you
can reduce the risk everything is risk
management so how do I reduce risks and
even even if you have the can oh every
time I go it never goes away it's still
d and it's just you know they try to cut
it out it came back but it never really
still kind of indolent well good keep it
indolent that's what you
want I want I wanted to get into your
research and some of OT warg's research
on cancer as a metabolic disease versus
a genetic um issue I think still and you
could let me know if you disagree but if
I went out into the streets of Miami
here and I walked around South Peach and
I surveyed like went up to 100 people
and asked them hey cancer let me ask you
a question about cancer do you believe
cancer is a genetic disease do you
believe that either you have bad luck
good luck but it's all due to genetics I
would guess that maybe 90 out of a
hundred people would say yeah it's
genetics bad luck nothing you can do
about it would you say that's a fair
assessment oh absolutely and one of the
one of the young girls from high school
um Grace she did a video just that did
that's right yeah right she and she did
asked the same questions in the street I
don't know if it was my I know it was
Texas I think somewhere down there and
just about everybody thought it was
genetic and if you go to any go down to
the big cancer hospitals um mfet in in
in in Florida you can go to m MD
Anderson you can go to Sloan karing you
go to Dana Farber down here the Fred
Hutch no matter where you go and you
walk into the oncology oh yeah cancer is
definitely genetic uh they say it on the
national NCI website cancer is 100
different diseases all genetic
this is such nonsense uh they have no
clue do they I don't know if they read
the scientific literature understand or
just deny it uh I mean let's look at
look at this is what we have found that
and we have published and it's already
published in the scientific literature
by many many scientists there are
Cancers that have no mutations all right
how do you explain that well first of
all um the somatic mutation theory of
cancer says that all cancers come from
genetic mutations acquired in your life
in the nucleus of of of the the cell and
those mutations lead to cause
disregulated cell growth which is cancer
cancer is cell division out of control
disregulated cell growth caused by
mutations in certain genes of the
nucleus of the cell that's the sematic
mutation theory of cancer disregulated
cell growth caused by nuclear gene
mutation
acquired in your lifetime in your in
your life this is different from germ
germline inherited mutations so somatic
mutations are acquired okay great so uh
Michael Stratton and his group from
England uh they did a massively
comprehensive analysis on breast cancer
and they found about 30% of breast
tumors had no mutations whereas other
other uh breast tumors some massive
thousands and thousands of mutations in
some breast tumors but but in some of
them there were no mutations so in the
paper it says cancer is a genetic
disease caused by mutations and then
they show we have some cancers that have
no mutations how do you think the
authors of that paper address that they
ignore it it's not part how could you
state one thing and have evidence not
supporting it and this has been found in
certain endol blastomas of children they
can't find mutations in certain kinds of
cancers it doesn't happen often let me I
want to be clear about that there aren't
there are not many cancers where there
are no mutations but the fact that you
could find one or a few says there's got
to be something else going on here
that's number one then we found over as
the genome we spent billions dollars on
the so-called cancer genome Atlas
supported by the national cancer
institutes the pharmaceutical Industries
all of the players that that want to
want to get involved with this so the
idea was we're going to sequence every
mutation found in every kind of a Cancer
and we're going to then make targeted
drug therapies to Target these mutations
well first of all we started to find
tens of millions of mutations like
they're everywhere every so so we had to
parse the field had to parse they all
can't be bad because we could never T
Target 100,000 mutations or more to help
one cancer patient every cell in the
tumor has a different pattern of
mutations they're all different from
each other one tumor in this person has
different mutations than the same tumor
in another person and even within this
person every cell in that tumor is
different kinds of mutations this is
this is what we see so we then the field
then said well um this is problem this a
real problem but we should then Define
that there only some kinds of mutations
that are really the bad ones leading to
the disregulated cell growth these are
called driver mutations okay so we have
driver mutations that are the bad ones
and we have passengers that kind of just
are mutated but they don't seem to do
anything so we separate the p and we
have Hills and Valleys and all kinds of
different parts of mutations and all
this kind of stuff but now with the new
with the new um uh findings uh we're now
with deep sequencing they said well what
let's let's look at normal tissues and
normal people that never get cancer so
we took the field scientists that are
published in top journals as we speak
they're coming out all the time we're
finding thousands of driver gene
mutations in tissues uh of normal
healthy guys that never get cancer so
how do you explain that you just told
that the passengers don't do anything
and the drivers are the ones that cause
disregulated cell growth now we find
drivers and normal people never get
cancer this is nuts so um and we have
tumor suppressor genes and then we have
enco genes and all of these kinds of
genes are found in normal people that
don't get cancer so how do you how do
you now all of a sudden see that and
then um and no no it's it's there it's
there but I know it's it's a problem
it's a problem but we we we have we
haven't we don't have an answer yet we
don't have an answer yet you ever think
the theory is wrong that's the
answer spot on spot on you're
looking the theory is wrong get over it
so um so then uh I took out of the
literature all the nuclear mitochondrial
transfer experiments that which were the
that's the nail in the coffin for this
whole thing when you take a nucleus out
of a tumor cell loaded with all the
drivers and and and monco genes and
tumor suppressor genes and you put it
into a new cytoplasm of a that doesn't
have cancer now you take that cell and
put it into the rat you don't get any
tumors um on the other hand if I take
the the nucleus the normal healthy
nucleus out of a normal cell and put it
into the cytoplasm of a of a of a rat
tumor and put it under oh boom you get a
tum so clearly it was not the nucleus D
calling the shots it's the mitochondria
in the cytoplasm and how do we know it's
the mitochondria because the Chinese did
some beautiful experiments where they
took normal mitochondria and put them
into into Goma cells and shut off the
enogen and turned off all the genetic uh
Power right so why do you why enogen are
facilitators of a fermentation
metabolism to replace the damaged
mitochondria so once you know it's the
mitochondria they're calling the shots
on this whole thing uh then the NCI is
wrong the the National Cancer Institute
is flat out wrong and and they're and
they're they they did in
1984 uh they invited the pharmaceutical
companies into the labs because the
progress to the Cure was going too slow
so they figured if we brought the
Pharmaceuticals into the labs uh the
Cure would come faster how's that
working out for us we have 1,700 people
a day dying from cancer in the United
States it's 70 an hour right 70 people
an hour over 60 11,000 people are dying
every year from cancer so in 1984 they
brought the pharmaceutical companies
into the labs and it says right on the
NCI website National Cancer instit
website progress not work we're bringing
the pharmaceutical companies so we're
spending a fortune on cancer drug drugs
immunotherapies all this crazy stuff
based on the sematic mutation theory yes
there are folks out there that are
living and have survived you know you
know every now and then the blind
squirrel finds the nut you know and you
get some people that are doing really
really well see see you're going to do
really well but we got 1,700 people a
day dying that aren't doing so well um
and some of these immunotherapies that
are targeting genes okay get it a load
of this they they have a tumor oh it has
mutations and our immune system can't
kill because there's some so we want our
immune system to kill so we we put these
immunotherapies on there but don't
forget some normal cells have those same
problems so those immunotherapies can
blow out your liver and kidneys and
that's called hyper Progressive disease
oh but that's the that's the price we
have to pay to help a few people that's
that's nuts you know the the whole thing
here you're working on the wrong Theory
guys and once you once you abandon the
somatic mutation Theory and recognize
that it's a mitochondrial metabolic
disease then you're going to see the big
drop and then you're going to see the
the the drop and death that's when
you're going to see the drop in death
that's just like the AIDS when we use
the AIDS cocktail the the HIV cocktail
drop dead people drop way down because
they were on working on the right
mechanism of of controlling that right
now I mean you hear advertised at night
on television op Divo and katuda a
chance to live longer and also a chance
to die sooner they don't talk about but
they actually do they don't lie they
spend more time telling you how the drug
is going to kill you than and how it's
going to give you the chance to live
long they're not hiding anything but no
and they always so smiling faces you
know guys in a canoe riding a bike or
something like don't show you're sitting
on a toilet yeah yeah you
know your eyeballs blood coming out of
your mouth I me all this kind of stuff
nobody would buy it then right nobody
would go they're explaining the side
effects they like to your point they're
showing somebody happy yeah showing a
happy guy happy guy and with oh this
guy's going to have massive diarrhea
fatigue nausea vomiting and he's riding
the bites SM
I you don't show running into the John
after right the bik you know you know
but but the problem is these poor folks
um they go down to the oncologists at
the top medical schools thinking they
know what they're talking about and when
you talk to them about cancer as a
metabolic this oh there's no evidence to
support that yeah what did you read the
SC no I don't have to read the
scientific literature if it were right I
would have heard about it so that's
called confirmation bias yeah so the
field the field just does what everybody
else does mindlessly and and it has to
be right because the NCI says it's right
the drug companies say it's right
television advertisements can't be wrong
so uh um so and then you have this
problem and everybody wakes up and they
say before it's you know I get dozens
and dozens of emails from all these
cancer patients where where everything
that they've given them carti
immunotherapies they've given them this
they've given them that and and now
they're still suffering from cancer and
it's haded control spreading through
their body and now their bodies are so
brutalized by poisonous chemicals and
radiation and surgical mutilations they
can't rally their body any longer and
and and they die so this is tragedy as I
said in many of these you this is going
to this will eventually be recognized
the single greatest tragedy tragedy in
the history of medicine using Medieval
tools to make people uh healthy poison
and radiating them and doing all this
crazy kind of stuff and people fear when
they get diagnosed with cancer they fear
having their hair fall out their gums
bleeding sitting on the toilet they they
they have this impending doom that I
have to go through this miserable
torture only to end up dead and then the
problem is many do survive like you said
the body was brutalized and yet no
matter what you did to this guy he's
still alive um but they pay as many not
all many people pay a significant price
for their survival they have neuros
psychiatric problems hormonal problem
bone density problems all kinds of uh
other problems uh that came for the fact
that you were poisoned and irradiated
and brutalized by a system you didn't
get out of this free and your quality of
life can be impacted significantly as
the result of being a cancer survivor
Survivor of what my God what they did to
these poor folks but um yeah well
metabolic therapy is coming you either
join it or you get out of the way
because it's coming and people want it
and once we once we have oh where's the
evidence well the uh Maggie and Brad
Jones are building a document with the
evidence uh we're publishing papers with
the evidence uh more and more people are
surviving does it cure everybody no it
doesn't but it certainly gives a an
opportunity for people to live longer
and they but they have to shoulder like
you said at the beginning you have to
shoulder a significant amount of that
burden now you're the one you're
responsible for your destiny if you're
not adherent to the metabolic approach
then you don't have anybody to blame but
yourself so uh um but I can it requires
discipline uh but you're but you're in
charge that's why we built the glucose
Ketone index calculator to allow people
to know whether they're in nutritional
ketosis and then when you're in that
nutritional ketosis based on your own
biology your own blood then you can
bring in the non-toxic drugs to work on
the glutamine problem so uh um so yeah
we have it all we have it pretty well
outlined it just has to be put into
practice in the major clinics and that's
not happening anytime soon because they
they think it's a genetic disease so
that why even talk about what I'm
talking yeah I want to talk more about
the the metabolic the mitochondria and
this what's happening here at the
mitochondrial level and then a little
bit more about the glucose and Ketone
index that you've talk about before we
get there I want to take a quick break
from the video you're watching to share
something with you that has made a big
difference with my health and the
thousands and thousands of students that
I teach all across the world now this is
a unique device that has been shown to
help with skin Health sore muscle
wrinkles psoriasis eczema scoliosis
migraines sleep issues arthritis acne
scar tissue wound healing relaxation and
also boost testosterone levels it's red
light therapy turn it on and as you can
see I just leave it there on my desk as
I work 10 20 minutes uh per day will
suffice then head over to bond
charge.com
SLO camp and use the coupon code keto
Camp to get 15% off your red light
device so whether it's these Bond charge
blue light blocking glasses their sauna
blanket or any of their awesome products
use that coupon code keto camp at
checkout we'll drop a link down below go
check them out they are awesome and
let's get back to today's video you know
one of the things I've noticed over the
last few years is when I have somebody
that's close to me that has been
diagnosed with cancer I see that they're
going down that route of a genetic thing
conventional treatments and I do my best
to open up and have conversations and
maybe share some of your research um Dr
NAA Winters is a good friend of mine
some of her research um but they're so
the individual with cancer they're
living in fear because they just got
this diagnosis their doctors telling
them that you know doing ketosis and
fasting other that doesn't work like you
said this is all Theory there's no
research to back it up they don't know
about the research and most of the time
the message that I share with them the
the podcast the book whatever it is it
just falls on deaf ears and I've lost a
few people that got went down the route
of conventional therapy and eventually
lost their life H how do we overcome
that how do we have better conversations
with people to get this information to
them well that's the that's the gradual
transformation um it doesn't happen uh
overnight uh you your training in
medical schools all of the Physicians
are trained that cancer is a genetic
disease their first bi biic biochemistry
classes say it's a genetic disease wow
and then those who go into oncology uh
learn how to how to wield the power of
poison and radiation and uh uh to to
bring to try to kill tumor without
killing the patient uh so it's not so
much how effective it is against the
tumor it's how how you're not going to
try to kill your patient with doing
using a dosage that's too high um so
they're that they're trained on that
and uh uh and the surgeons of course you
know show me something I'll cut it out
you know um but uh you know they're just
there oh we have to cut this guy's tumor
out let's run them in you know what we
do with metabolic therapy you have an
opportunity to shrink the hell out of
that tumor uh and then the surgeon we're
not we're not against in fact we're not
against any part of standard of care um
we just want to use those tools in the
correct way um the problem with the guys
in the medical schools and the alc count
they just don't know uh number one they
have they have no clue about the biology
of what they're doing not not because
they're they're they're um dumb or
stupid they just they just there's very
smart people they just have not been
given the training to understand what
the nature of the problem is so it's not
you know that and and they make a good
lifestyle at doing what they do so is
there any motivation to to to want to
change what you do um right uh but you
know uh yeah so the training is not
there uh they don't recognize that
cancer is a metabolic disease and that
has to change once you start changing
once you understand the science that's
driving the disregulated cell growth why
the tumors are growing out of control in
the first place and what how where they
get their energy and fuel to do this
stuff then then you then you know what
to Target them how to Target but they
don't get any of that that's not part of
the training right now so that's a gap
and then you when the patients go into
the clinics and say you know I heard
sugar really Drive no no no has nothing
to do with that um did well what what
you know you asked the oncologist Well
you certainly know about outo Work N I
never heard of them wow so I mean how
how are you how are you supposed to
treat a person correctly when you have
no uh training or knowledge of the very
issues that are Central to the success
of your treatment wow now um uh that's
not to say we know that if we do an
upfront if there's a watchful waiting
period without some critical
situation we we know that surgery can
cure cancer it has happened many many
many times so but the problem is you
want to make sure that this when the
surgeon does uh debulk or take out the
tumor that he's going to get it all so
it doesn't recur if you go into a tumor
too aggressively at the beginning uh you
can spread that tumor around this is
like um biopsies can do this as well
doesn't happen a lot but it happens
enough to kill people um there's a lot
of evidence for this in the science but
no I even sent out papers oh no this
never happens then I sent him 20 papers
oh I wasn't aware of this well you don't
read the scientific Literature Like I
right so um and you're not talking about
it and yet here's all these papers
saying this can happen oh wow I didn't
know that just like the Johnson and
Johnson Mor moral procedure they used a
morat morcellation morcellation to
remove uterine pops it's like kind of a
grind up system you know they were
killing people spreading the cancer
around the body finally they had to stop
using that I mean he perfectly
understandable because you can because
the the metastatic cancer is a it's part
of our immune system another thing the
the field is clueless about yet there we
every major human cancer is expresses
characteristics of macras which is a
very powerful immune system in our body
the macrofagos have fused with certain
stem cells cancer stem cells and now
become Rogue macrofagos and they spread
all around your body driven heavily by
glucose and glutamine so we we know kind
of kill cancer cells without toxicity
just by what knowing what they what the
biology of their dependency on fuel is
uh that's not even discussed when you go
to an oncologist what do I have to eat
to to reduce my probability of having
the no nothing take the infam take the
sugar what are you crazy this is nuts
you know we published the first paper
using linear regression analysis in mice
showing that the higher the blood sugar
in the mouse the faster the the brain
tumor would grow or even a flank tumor
the lower the sugar the slower it would
go and we did linear regression showing
it was the glucose that was the driver
the driver using glucose as the
independent variable and tumor growth as
the dependent variable he showed this
now then after that numerous studies
came out of the clinical human
literature showing the same thing in
breast cancer colon cancer brain cancer
the higher the blood sugar the the the
the lower the the the less the patient
would survive had the the lowest
survival rate over and over and over
again and yet you go to oncology clins
nothing sugar has nothing to do with it
what do you people don't read the
scientific literature so it's
frustrating to me because I read all
this stuff and they're peer-reviewed
good good articles we've tested it in
our own we've double tested these things
found that yes we confirm everything
they're doing they confirm our results
we confirm their results and yet it's
like it's not even considered in the in
the clinics so um it's slowly coming
around I think the oncology Community is
slowly realizing sure ain't good yeah so
uh keep your blood sugar as low as you
possibly can and they can't burn Ketone
bodies or fatty acids people say oh yes
they can no they can't we tested it all
here and the literature is full of paper
showing they can't do that so y so just
to clarify you're saying there's there's
not there's not a cancer that could feed
off of fatty acids and ketones is that
what you just said yeah we can't find
one no no all the major let's put it
this way the major cancers that are
killing 90 98% of people cannot use
fatty A AIDS and Ketone BS now I'm not
saying there's a cancer out there but if
it were it would have normal
mitochondrial function therefore it
would not be a cancer so because our
normal cells brain heart liver all these
not liver liver can burn fatty acids not
Ketone yeah but all other all other
cells can burn ketones and fatty isn't
it interesting the liver the only organ
that U produces ketones doesn't use the
ketones it it produces large amounts of
ketones but Burns fatty acids yeah so
because the the Scott enzyme is is
different in the liver so so so um yeah
yeah so you know that and oh no they can
burn fatty well you know what we found
we found that if you take a lot of fatty
acids in uh they oh look at it's making
the cancer grow fast what the fatty
acids do is they uncouple the
mitochondria forcing to use glucose and
glutamate at higher so it looks like
it's not the fat fatty acids are fueling
the F the ferment fermentable fuels but
are not using the directly using fatty
acids in fact they accumulate as lipid
droplets in the cyop pl just published a
big paper on this just came out 2024 all
major cancers are have have lipid
droplets in the cytoplasm uh because
they can't be used so they store them in
the cytoplasm and what happens is if
they try to use them they form reactive
oxygen species and die so it's actually
a protective mechanism to store the
fatty acids because if God forbid if
they start burning them cancer cells
will blow up so they store them in the
cytoplasm and all major cancers we've
looked at all of them they all have
mitochondrial abnomalities and store
lipid droplets in the cytoplasm tells us
they're mitochondria defective what are
they using to stay alive why are they
growing so fast glucose and glutamine
the amino acid glutamine you take those
two away and they Clump they they
collapse and guess what not a single
Clinic anywhere in the world is is
simultaneously targeting the two
metabolic fuels needed and transitioning
the body over to ketones nobody can you
we got 1700 people a day dying and not a
single Clinic anywhere on the planet is
doing what I just mentioned
it's what you know why they don't
believe it why do they not believe it
because cancer is a genetic disease
haven't you heard it's the Paradigm it's
it's the current Paradigm it's a strong
Paradigm and you work yeah so you
continually pump out kinas Inhibitors
elk gene mutation all that kind of stuff
it's largely irrelevant they're D
they're being driven by a fermentation
metabolism mutations have little if
anything to do with this whole process
they're Downstream epiphenomenon of the
damage from reactive oxygen species
causing all this stuff and you're
focusing on Downstream stuff we got
1,700 people a day
wow wow well there's a lot of money to
be made on Downstream stuff isn't there
well they should then then patients
should be told that yes thank you we're
so appreciative of of your sickness
because it's driving driving our our
industry here um but they don't say that
if you go into Dana Farber or these
cancer clinics it's unbelievably
beautiful it's you could eat off the
floors everything is so clean the
bathrooms every you walk in everybody's
smiling and everybody and and and the
Next Room they're poison AR right
exactly make any sense right well you
know I will see like somebody going
through chemotherapy the food that's
given to them in the hospitals same
processed food that we spoke about like
doesn't make any
sense I know it's nuts isn't it I mean
when you when people come to realize
what we've been doing this is in the
future right we're 2024 okay let's let's
do 2124 this is a 100 years from you
know you and I will be dead uh long gone
and they're look back and say who are
those crazy folks that did this to our
members of our speci how could our
brains be so stupid my
God but this is what we're doing yeah
and this is our day this is today ah
that is so interesting okay so the
mitochondria that's important I'd love
for you to share you know maybe like a
protocol a 30-day protocol just your
favorite ways to enhance mitochondrial
function I'm not saying to prevent
cancer to starve cancer but to support
the mitochondri what are your favorite
methods to do that well I mean what what
we did as we evolved we were always in a
in a state of nutritional ketosis yeah
mainly mainly because we did not have uh
doughnut shops and delicatessens on
every corner or food in general food in
general and what we did eat we ate
everything that's why humans are
omnivores yeah uh they humans will eat
and we know anything that swims crawls
walks or flies on this planet or grows
uh we'll eat it um and uh that's how we
evolved so we were always in a state of
nutritional ketosis and my my good late
friend Dr Richard vich from the
NIH metabolism biochemistry branch and
George Cahill the late George Cahill who
ran the Jin diabetes center we would sit
the three of us for hours and hours and
hours and talk about metabolism and
ketones and all this and and and vich
was Hans krebs's last graduate student
of of the KB
so aich was a brilliant guy absolutely
brilliant and kahill man this guy knew
so much about human physiology these are
the Giants of the field and we' sit for
hours and talk about this and burning
ketones makes your mitochondria super
healthy you actually get more when you
every breath we breathe we we generate
energy but there's a Delta G Prime ATP
hydrolysis how efficiently uh we produce
ATP and hydroly it and when you're
burning ketones you actually is a super
fuel you can get more energy from
molecule of air breathed from burning
ketones than you can with either glucose
or fatty acids so it's a really
bioenergetic energy efficient fuel
bioenergetic enhances the health and
vitality of your mitochondria producing
fewer reactive oxygen species which is
related to the second law of
Thermodynamics which is entropy disorder
we all die because of entropy the second
law of thermodynam Dynamics basically we
run out of energy we have disorder our
bodies can no longer produce sufficient
amounts of energy and we die well when
you're burning ketones you simply delay
that process you stay healthier for a
longer period of time not to say that
you're going to live forever that's not
what we're talking about but we're
extending the possibility of how long we
could live if we're in ketosis now our
ancestors were always in ketosis but
they had a short lifespan I told you if
they live 45 50 I was an old guy back
then but that's because they were dying
from infections and injuries they
weren't they weren't dying from dementia
type two diabetes and cancer
true they weren't dying from the things
that are killing us today and the and I
tell you the guys the obese people are
are the descendants of our ancestors who
were able to live on minuscule amounts
of food they their store energy to
survive under the most extreme
conditions and now when food is like
available and everywhere those same
traits that allowed us to survive
horrific conditions of environmental
forcing now put us at risk for cancer
dementia all these kinds of things it's
the environment it's our environment and
us not knowing how to deal with this new
our our technology has evolved so much
faster than our biology we are still
Paleolithic man in a modern society and
we're paying the price for this and
don't forget these poor cave Guys these
Paleolithic guys I mean do you think
they would be excited if someone were to
make a jelly donut and throw it into the
cave they' kill themselves for this
thing I mean you of course no I'm G to
stick with the raw squirrel thank
you are you kidding me you gave me a
nice hot pizza and oh you know you want
to chew on this the rump of this Buffalo
you're gonna have a nice
Pizza of course we evolved to want that
and now we have so much of it it's
killing us right yeah we have
essentially a keto deficiency nowadays
yes yeah because we're not exercising
and we're eating highly processed
carbohy hydrates and we're putting
ourselves in stress stress elevates
glucocorticoids which R blood sugar yes
okay uh so you have to manage all of
this if you really want to get into a
healthy zone and it's hard in our in our
lifestyle today I mean it's amazing when
you watch television now the young
people are all into the computers or
this whatever they look at but you look
at television at night the old people
right comes on with all the drugs for
for obesity cancer and all this kind of
stuff and then the football games come
on it's all the pizzas and Coca-Cola and
all the stuff you want that's going to
kill you right so you you watch the
constant brainwash you gotta love the
advertising they know who's out there
right yeah 75% of TV commercials at
least in 2020 75% of TV commercials in
the United States were funded by big
Pharma 75% it's hot it's probably higher
now but that's so that's okay they
they're interested in making a buck just
like everybody else's um but it but it
is kind of you know I I tell you when
when you do water on only fasting you
know if you're sitting there reading a
book and a and a commercial comes on for
pizza or coca colola or a donut or
burger or one of these things and you're
full and you're sitting there reading
the book you don't sometimes look up to
even watch it but I tell you when you
haven't eaten anything for three days
and that commercial comes on you are
focused on that TV like you can't
believe you start to tremble while you
watch the
commercial that goes to show you the
power of what's going on that is a good
point that is true so you mentioned
nutritional ketosis that would be one of
the steps here it's it's more efficient
than fatty acids and glucose for the
mitochondria well yeah but you the the
the the um fatty acids are mobilized out
of the atpo cells they go into the
bloodstream they go to the liver and
they're chopped up to water soluble
Ketone bodies and they can subserve your
brain and and organs and you get
healthier you get more efficient that
way is it easy no it's not easy give me
a break wait oh yes I want to run out
and do it yeah let's see how long you
can do it you know so so uh what we do
for the cancer patients not me I'm not a
doctor I can't a physician I can't tell
them what to do or what not to do but we
we transition them away from
carbohydrates for about 10 or 14 days
depending and we use the glucose Ketone
index calcul that that we developed here
at Boston College I I made it for the
gleo blastoma patients but then other
cancer patients are using it and now uh
even guy young guys that want to be
healthy uh they want to be in the
Paleolithic Zone they want to be like
Paleolithic man yeah they can use it to
save in that healthy zone and they can
compare their gki and say you know we
said 2.0 or
below um for cancer management because
most people are in 50 or 60s so you know
and you can test it on yourself which is
interesting because we've done it here
in the lab a couple of times you know
people don't eat for three or four days
to get a beautiful gki and then they eat
certain foods and you can see what you
drink a Coca-Cola man it's like you know
those things where you where you go to
the the the the carnival and you hit the
hit the thing and thing goes up and
rings the bell I mean blood sugar oh man
you knock the Bell right off the top of
the stand
yeah and or if you drink if you eat um
um a fat ladened kind of food like an
avocado or or something like this you
get very little change it's almost even
dark red wine uh doesn't B bump it up
too much um but anything that would have
significant carbs immediately shoots up
your the ketones go down and the glucose
goes up so Paleolithic station is where
glucose and ketones are a relative unity
in the blood the Ketone and the glucose
are now Unity um whereas mostly it's
high glucose very low ketones but but
tumor cells thrive on the glucose and
they can't burn the ketones so you're
putting them at a competitive risk the
rest of your cells in the body all of a
sudden upregulate Transporters to get as
much glucose out therefore the poor
tumor cell is getting starved indirectly
because your normal cells the brain will
take what little glucose is being
produced by the liver uh the brain gets
first dibs brain gets first dibs muscles
get the greediest organ is that brain
huh yeah yes and and not only that and
muscles muscle does not share glucose
and that's evolutionarily conserved
because you need to run away from the
bear that's chasing you but muscle oh
let's have the liver let's give all the
share the bear comes and you're you're
dead meat right
oh I gave I gave all my energy away to
my kidneys those damn kidneys screw me
again fine but I I have no so the once
the glycogen builds up in your muscles
that's for the muscles to get contract
so if you continue to exercise your the
tumors is a last one on the totem uh to
get the to get the available glucose and
it needs it to stay alive and it starts
dying so you can completely marginalize
these tumors and then you come in with
the GL glutamine targeting which is the
other fuel that they use and and you can
you can shut these guys down while the
body is in nutritional ketosis fatty
acids and ketones that the tumor cells
can't use and the normal cells are
gobbling all that up magic and taking
what little glucose they can get this
poor tumor that's absolutely dependent
on it it's getting hammered you got to
feel bad for the tumor under metabolic
conditions yeah yeah I don't know if
feel bad for that but yeah well some you
there's guys out there who actually
would feel bad for the T really oh I
mean you look at the way people look at
things you know sometimes they just look
at things in a very different way than
everybody else interesting I never even
thought about that before what what role
is theophagy playing here with ketosis
and fasting the what what role is what
autophagy playing here yeah well
autophagy during water only
fasting autophagy is an internal
surveillance uh to improve the energetic
efficiency inside cells so mitochondria
are usually what is parts of the
mitochondrial spaghetti Network that we
have in the cell bits and pieces of
mitochondria will break off uh they will
uh enter into what we call endosomes and
then the endosomes go into the lome and
the bits and pieces are chopped up and
redistributed within the cell so what
remains then is a highly energy
efficient mitochondrial Network so
autophagy happens when people do water
only fasting and things like this but we
also in my book I have also written uh
about autolytic cannibalism which is
like a an out out uh external to
internal autophagy autophagy is internal
to the cell uh autolytic cannibalism is
where the body is then placed under
tremendous uh energy restriction uh as I
said there's a there's a a a whole body
surveillance not only internal AO aooa
autophagy in inside the cell internal
surveillance but now every cell in in
our body must justify its existence and
must be at the maximal Energy Efficiency
otherwise it's going to be eliminated we
eliminate the weak we keep the strong
the tumor is there gobbling up energy
resources wasting so the body will
attack the tumor from the outside it's
called autolytic cannibalism because
there's a nice lump of food that's those
cells are not carrying their weight
they're inefficient they're fermenting
rather than respiring they're
inefficient so our immune system will go
in and dissolve and kill the tumor cells
and distribute the fuel to the rest of
our body it's called autolytic
cannibalism it's a it's autophagy
outside the cell so cool it's so it's
unbelievable it's amazing and all you
have to do is just fast pretty much and
all that will happen for you yeah but
yeah yeah it's a hell a lot easier said
than well I mean I've done um five days
before several times I do fed day water
fast what's your longest fast that
you've done oh me personally i' I've
done three days three days yeah well I
mean it's for cancer patient long you
know uh my friends were building uh
ketogenic muffins right and we have lab
meeting and they have these they bring
oh they want us to try from some company
you know somebody that oh I'm making
some ketogenic food so at the land
meeting we'll eat the muffin right it's
you take it tastes like cardboard it's
all crumbly and everything it's horrible
you know you say Jesus I that's it
that's it no more of this keto muffin
but I tell you um when I had that
three-day fast uh and I had the chance
to eat on the third day they I had this
ketogenic muffin I'm telling you it was
the best damn muffin I ever ate in my
life I I was I was trembling while I ate
that I was getting crumbs all over the
place I couldn't get into my mouth fast
enough you were you were hungry oh I'm
telling you all of a sudden that muffin
that tasted terrible became the best
thing you ever ate
so when you're hungry man I'll tell you
there ain't that's another thing too
people have all these ailments oh this
hurts that hurts and don't eat for like
several days you don't think about
anything that hurts anymore next thing
all you're thinking about is your next
that's a good point yeah that's a good
point all of a sudden you become focused
on the really important issue where's my
next big meal where's my yeah it's funny
when I when I first did my first uh 5day
water fast I think it was 2018 did it
with Dr Poma and a group of the doctors
that we we work with we were just doing
it as a team and I I day two was
probably the most difficult one with the
hunger I I noticed I had a lot of hunger
but once I reached day three and I was
tracking my glucose and ketones and I
achieved um I achieved The Sweet Spot of
the gki on day three I got there but I
stayed there for a couple days showing
good metabolic flexibility but one of
the things I noticed was that I was very
introverted during the fast my my
girlfriend my fiance now girlfriend at
the time was asking me why are you so
quiet why aren't you talking to me and I
was just like in my in my thoughts I was
I was really creative my sleep wasn't
that great too but it was it was a
really interesting experience for me no
well it usually wipes the smile right
off your face you know food brings so
much pleasure right
yeah oh I man I haven't had anything for
three days I'm so happy you
know no no it's it's it's a tough thing
to do and uh people we're doing it
because uh we we want to try it our
Paleolithic ancestors weren't doing that
because they wanted to they had to yeah
they didn't have the food and just think
about how hard it would be to track down
a woolly mammoth and kill it uh or a big
buffalo or or some other uh her before
uh you had to kill you had to track that
thing and and the energy that would go
into doing that because we didn't have
domesticate we weren't at that point in
our existence we weren't domesticating
we had no grains uh or or source of food
uh we were hunter gatherers for for tens
of thousands of years so our physiology
is in in that a lot of energy used uh we
would Gorge ourselves with the amount of
food that we could get at the time and
there's a very interesting paper that
came out of Israel uh Tel Aviv about
about two or three months ago where
humans were responsible for the
extinction of large numbers of of big
animals on the planet it turns out that
our ancestors would killed the top
strongest members of The Herd uh because
the marrow in the bone uh was best and
the strongest so they would leave they
wouldn't kill the the the the young and
they wouldn't kill the old they would go
they would go for the strongest members
of The Herd now when you do that you
leave The Young and the old vulnerable
to Predators so the next thing you know
the species is wiped out because of your
desire to eat the strong ones so um so
we're in our our ancestors were so
clever in how they killed and ate
animals and they would fish they would
catch the fish imagine surviving on Ice
flows killing seals and stuff like this
uh I mean think about and and then we're
doing that's hard work doing all that
stuff now I visited the the int
population
uh or the the medical school that
Services the ints in thunderbay Canada
which is their Med medical school there
and they service the the ints I guess
that they don't like the term Eskimo I
guess that's a bad term now you can't
use it but they the Inuit as they call
they're just people who live in the
Artic Circle you know now they're
suffering from type two diabetes
massively Cancer all of the chronic
diseases uh because they don't no longer
have to run across I FL ice flows to
kill a seal uh or go out into a freezing
cold kayak or boc go out and kill some
animal on the they get get it's all
delivered now to them and they're
massively unhealthy but that's that's
happened to our Native American
populations as well so um clearly uh you
can go back in the early in the year 2
uh 1900 the py blow injuries some of
these Native American tribes they were
thin jacked people and now they're like
suffering massively from type two
diabetes in in such a short few
Generations just a couple of generations
you go from Super Health to Super un
Wellness so um sure it's all diet
lifestyle it's clear and uh once you
realize that uh then you know how to
manage these diseases and prevent them I
would say prevention H it's like the guy
who smokes I'm not going to get lung
cancer I'll just I'll deal with it when
I get it uh that's the but the other
thing nice about metabolic therapy yes
uh if you have cancer you can use it to
manage it and you can use a very similar
approach to prevent it this differs
dramatically from standards of care for
cancer today I don't see a line in Dana
Farber of a whole bunch of young people
lining up to get IR radiated and
poisoned so that they won't get cancer
in the future right good point it
doesn't make sense right but they'll do
that to you after you get cancer this is
what we're gonna do to you poison in a
radiate and I'm saying wow but with
metabolic therapy you can use the same
strategy to both prevent and treat so um
so it's really interesting but it's
going to take knowledge people have to
come to know this and uh it's going to
take time for them to come and they're
going to want to know so the change is
going to come from people it's not going
to come from the top places that's why
conversations like this are are
incredible it's it's so important to
share you know I feel bad I I I want to
apologize to all your listeners because
they hear me say all this stuff and then
they run down there to these places and
get slapped down they feel so bad what
is C freed saying oh my God he told me
how to man and I wanted to talk to the T
head guy and he says there's no evidence
to support this well at least you're
warning them that's going to happen
right be be aware that's that's
definitely more than likely it's that's
what's going to happen because these
guys feel that they know what they're
doing correct but again we've got in the
conversation that we're having now 70
people are dying somewhere in the
hospitals or at home from cancer yeah
right so uh clearly something's not
right here yeah you know the thing you
mentioned earlier is I want to just
expand upon that uh how technology has
advanced faster than human physiology we
we are hardwired the way that our
ancestors lived for such a long time and
when we fast forward to the convenience
of Uber Eats and door Dash and all the
things we have available uh our our um
metabolism like when we go in a fasted
State even though we know consciously we
could walk to the refrigerator open it
up and get food even though we could hit
a button on our phone and have somebody
knocking on our door with food in 30
minutes we're still hardwired for the
old school so even though we understand
this consciously when we go into this
fasting State we're still hardwired the
old way where all these amazing things
happen even with the conscious awareness
that there's food out there so I think
that's super cool that our body
automatically goes into that healing
process even though there's food
available to us well that's the control
but you we we know that it can get out
of control sometimes um when you have
when some people have anorexia or
nervosa yes is the conscious uh ination
because the brain so the the animals uh
that are hardwired do not have a
conscious thought so what they do
they're hard the animals are hardwire
they they're they're not going to be
anorectic or any of these kinds of
things like humans because millions of
years of hard wiring told us we have to
eat we we were driven to eat but yet
with with
self-consciousness you can override uh
millions of years of hard wiring and
that can that can be very disastrous uh
for some people will even die uh because
they have this wrong image of themselves
uh they've challenged their biochemistry
they they've used conscious willpower to
override million millions of years of
evolutionary hard wiring in our brain
the the animals non non-human animals um
uh don't generally have to deal with
that so um so but that but you're right
exactly what you said we have a
conscious awareness that we that we know
the food is there but yet we're we're
not now our ancestors didn't have that
because the food was not there so they
had to they had to track it down and use
a lot of energy uh to eat that and get
that food so and there were no highly
processed carbohydrates in in the in the
most of our existence as a species on
this
planet or seed oils too or seed oils
yeah I I don't know if there were there
I you know we'd eat anything we could
find but none of it was cultivated or
Pro or processed or any of of this kind
of thing so um you know I'm sure our
ancestors would pig out on on ripe
berries during seasonal opportunities
the Bears do that I mean um but in
general everything was kind of seasonal
yeah it wasn't it wasn't available all
the time and you build festivals you you
build uh things around the availability
of these things when food was plentiful
you could have a a festival of some sort
you know U tide or whatever they want to
call it but but the idea is they built
these our cult our our our culture
builds around these opportuni used to
have a lot of food and we still do uh
except today we have massive mounts that
that our ancestors never had
yeah if you're following a low
carbohydrate keto diet or carnivore diet
this is one of the most important tips I
see a lot of people who struggle with
keto and carnivore and the reason they
struggle is because they are losing too
many electrolytes they're becoming
mineral depleted every cell in your body
needs minerals to function to produce
energy which helps you burn fat and feel
good my favorite minerals and
electrolytes are from beam minerals
these are fulvic and humic compounds
that are bioavailable that have have
over 70 minerals in them it tastes like
water they're carnivore friendly let me
explain why there are no anti-nutrients
in them it does not break a fast as a
matter of fact it could support your
fasting window and it's been a game Cher
for my health and I recommend it to all
my students head over to Bean minerals.
comom use the coupon code Z at checkout
my last name aad at checkout to get a
nice discount beam minerals. coupon code
is
aadii and U with with this you know
we're talking about the mitochondria we
spoke about ketosis lowering blood sugar
levels practicing fasting are there any
other routines and habits that you would
recommend to prevent chronic disease
prevent cancer what are some of your
favorite ways to enhance the
mitochondria for prevention outside well
I think doing doing the opposite of what
I said in the beginning so okay so let's
let's talk about that so moving your
body getting steps being Physically
Active that's amazing for the M like I
always tell my students always take the
stairs not the elevator we have an
elevator that we have a big stairway
here at the University and uh you'll
find more more students crammed into the
elevator than want to walk up the stairs
believe that
right oh they'll do it when you I I they
say oh well when I get old like you
maybe maybe we'll do some of that I say
you're you're going to be obese with
type two diabetes you won't be doing all
exactly you know so um but you know the
a lot of the young people they they seem
to start to understand this um but yeah
but but a lot of them are under stress
that's a new thing in our society I I
think it's coming from all this um this
uh Tik toks and social Med whatever the
hell they look at all this on the phone
they get all freaked out when they when
they read something um yeah so what else
uh poor sleep you know we we're in a lot
of stress uh our we understand things
we're not just you know walking through
life we understand there's a lot of
things that freak us out these stressful
things and uh sometimes you run to
comfort food which is highly processed
to remove and a lot of folks that are
living paycheck to paycheck can't afford
some of the foods that are that uh would
would make them healthy and their food
deserts and I mean we're causing a lot
of our own problems uh essentially so uh
um and it's like escalating and a lot of
the the folks that are lower economic
status suffering also from cancer
brutally uh which is which is kind of an
immoral uh thing this this should not
have to happen and the other thing that
we're that we realize is that people
always look at the adverse effects of
phys physical adverse effects of the
treatments uh for cancer but but we
published a big paper on financial t
toxicity the the uh cost of taking these
poisonous chemicals and radiation and
surgical cutting uh the charges to the
poor people uh even if you have a a a
copay or whatever I mean you get hit
with a $20,000 bill uh and you're
working paycheck to paycheck uh we found
marriages fall apart uh people commit
suicide uh
and it's past this is immoral Behavior
this is all immoral um people they
should care about this see one of the
things that at Boston College this said
Jesuit university that the the the
philosophy of service to others is is
Prim primary here you have to think of
the what you're doing and how it could
help somebody not trying to exploit them
I'm not saying nobody should make a
dollar listen we all we all need to make
money from from how we how we live but
man what we're doing to some of these
folks with cancer is just absolutely
immoral and uh uh that it has to change
because we we just can't live as a
society uh doing this and it's a it's a
world epidemic now it's not just the
United States you're seeing cancer out
of control in a lot of countries as soon
as that Western diet lifestyle comes
into the program you're going to have to
be aware that as tell as tasty and and
great as this is it can turn on you and
kill you in many different ways C can
you share the role of insulin and what
insulin does to create growth in the
body I know glucose and Insulin they go
hand in hand but I'd love for you to
share a little bit more about the
relationship with insulin and growth
well you know uh insulin is a very
powerful hormone uh we need it to you
know push sugar into the cells and if we
don't burn the sugar right away we store
it in edpost tissues but you know we
measured insulin in in animals that were
we put them on different on different
diets and let them eat as much as they
can and then we calorie restrict it uh
to get them all at the Baseline and and
you can see what happens to insulin even
when you eat um a a ketogenic diet in
high high concentrations you you people
say oh fat diet yeah uh we found insulin
insensitivity in ketogenic diets that
were given at
libidum uh which means the the animal
got fat eating fat that's not usually
what happens uh because most people we
have we have a hormone called kyin which
is an appetite suppressant so when the B
when humans this was the M when humans
eat a lot of fat we lose our appetite um
the problem the problem here with
insulin is that we have high fat high
carb diets yeah this is the worst thing
yeah so the the body interestingly
enough uh doesn't doesn't excrete
glucose gluc we have a kidney that
really
refiltered and things like this you
start excreting glucose in the urine but
fat if you don't burn fat right away you
can EX read it we actually looked at the
fecal pellets of the mouse and we fed
the the ketogenic diet and did a full
lipid analysis of what they're eating so
we did all the biochemistry of the
lipids and then we took the fecal
pellets from these guys and we ran them
next to it looks like what one go in one
end out the other that's cool it was
very very it was very interesting so
they're they're not but that's why we
give ketogenic diets in restricted
amounts because you want the fat that's
taken into the body to be burned and
utilized you don't want it to cause
insulin but if you take so much of it
it's like anything you take too much of
it it's unhealthy yeah so uh we did fish
oil diets we did ketogenic diets we did
high carb diets and every when you bring
it down to calorie restricted all the
diets became very similar with respect
to their blood we published this paper
nutrition and Metabolism so uh people
can go and look at it fish oil diet
ketogenic diets high carb diets and then
we we get them ad liit them and calorie
restricted and boy at calorie
restriction just everything became pler
planer across the diets so it it's very
very interesting so um and that's why
for cancer when the patients are given
food it's it's a a very low exceedingly
low uh carbohydrate diet so um so we're
not starving these people they're just
eating a very low carbohy small amounts
of low carbohydrate and then jump into
water fasting so if you if you eat a
high carb diet fat and carbs and on one
day and say I'm going to go water only
fast the next day it's like jumping off
the side of a building right but if you
walk down the steps and then take jump
off the last step it ain't so bad good
analogy yeah so so what we do is allow
the body over a 10 to 14 to 20 day
period to get into a new state of
existence and then say when I jump to
water only fasting oh it's not much
different than what I was doing already
so it's and then you get your low
gki and then the blood work starts to
really clear up uh all of these things
that were out of whack the triglycerides
the cholesterols and all these different
lipids oh my God this guy's getting back
into a healthy zone and the cancer cells
are getting hammered and then you come
in with the glutamine targeting drugs
that we're working on right now and uh
so we're taking the human body and we're
just bringing it back to where it should
have been and then we go in and we start
battling with the the glutamine thing so
um that just you know that just they
just those poor tumors so sometimes you
feel bad for them they getting hammered
so bad trying to
5 five and the normal cells of the body
yeah you're not so happy but the normal
cells of your body are really doing well
burning the ketones your heart's getting
better you're actually getting more
power for each heart pump yeah your your
brain is getting more acute to look at
things you're getting more focused
everything in your body is getting super
healthy except the tumor yeah that's
amazing that's incredible and the cells
in the body that are the most
metabolically demanded demanding that
are most required for survival the brain
the eyes the heart like you mentioned
those are the cells that the highest
concentration of mitochondria as well
and that's also interesting because
neurons of the brain and cardiac
myocytes rarely ever get cancer right
because as OT warberg said and as we say
um there's two steps to getting cancer
one is The Chronic disruption of
mitochondrial function and number two is
an upregulation of fermentation energy
from fermentation which is called
substrate level phosphorilation as
opposed to oxidative phosphorilation so
you have to have a twostep process
chronic disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation coupled with a
protracted upregulation of a
fermentation which leads to disregulated
cell growth neurons and cardiac
meiocytes can't can't sustain
fermentation metabolism for very long so
they die uh and as warberg said you can
never get a cancer cell from a dead a
dead cell so you that's why you rarely
have ever see tumors in cardiac myocytes
or in neuron of bra you see them in G
cells of the brain and sheath around
muscles but you don't usually find them
in the
cardiac sometimes skeletal muscle as
well uh uh so so clearly you have to
know the biology of your body uh what
they evolved to do how they did it what
their fuels are and what their
physiological functions are to know uh
how to manipulate your whole
physiological system against a group of
cells that are not playing by the rules
any longer um and uh we in our research
here we get really excited uh when we
see animals that have these we call them
graveyard my gu said if we didn't do
anything they'd be dead in a couple of
days how we can actually restore these
guys back to almost normaly running
around yeah so I said humans humans
actually do a hell of a hell of a lot
better than these than these poor mice
you know they only have a two-year
lifespan anyway but but but humans when
they do metabolic therapy everything
happens much more slowly so you can
intervene all along the way this poor
Mouse man you got to hit him right away
otherwise his physi his don't forget
people have to realize the basil
metabolic rate of a mouse in a human is
usually different right what's your
heart rate is about what 60 what is it
60 50 my resting heart rate's around
like 44 44 it's good low low okay you
know what okay 44 you're healthy guy 40
is very good very you must be very
athletic yes so so so what's the resting
heartbeat of a
mouse
uh1 15
how about 650 oh my
gosh a lot
faster if your head would blow off your
body if seriously yeah right so think
about this you got to know the
physiology of the systems you're working
on to make an appropriate translational
uh move to the clinic so we're so
excited when humans do this water do the
metabolic therapy because it can H we
can intervene in so many different ways
and push the patient in One Direction or
not depending how they're doing now
worrying about whether they're going to
be dead in two days like the mouse right
so so uh uh you know so so yeah we we
translate that's why you have to really
understand biology chemistry
evolutionary biology to really make
these translational changes to the human
uh and boy I'll tell you once we start
doing this in an industrial siiz
metabolic therapy we're going to set up
clinics all around the world and people
will come in and they come in you know I
got this I'm I'm I'm obese I got
diabetes I got pancreatic cancer colon
cancer breast cancer something like that
and then all of a sudden we work on this
whole metabolic therapy and you come out
on the other end you're no longer obese
you don't have any hypertension no high
blood pressure that stuff and besides
what happened to my cancer you know so
uh but it's not going to be easy because
a lot of the success rests on the
shoulder of the patient yeah they have
to be the ones that are motivated to do
this and if they're not motivated it's
like anything you a you're not going to
get the uh the outcome that you might
predicted yeah do you really plan on
setting up clinics like that oh yeah
that's the future that's the future it's
got to be unless people want to continue
to be radiated
employ the other thing because we'll
never we'll never tell anybody not to
have that right you know if that's what
they really want uh and feel important
that they would go down there and have
but but we're not throwing out radiation
and chemo uh as a matter of fact when
the patient is in nutritional ketosis
those kinds of parts of the standard of
care can actually be very very
therapeutic but you're using much much
lower dosages of these things so you
don't have to have your hair full I
every time I see a bald-headed cancer
patient I think that poor person was
treated by somebody who has no clue what
the nature of the disease is you're
trying to kill cancer cells they're not
hiding in your hair follicles why your
hair falling out you're trying to kill a
tumor cell why your gums are bleeding
and your your your microbiome is blown
to Hell everybody look oh the microbiome
is so important important unless you're
a cancer patient I don't seem to care
about it so so metabolic therapy
preserves your hair your gums your
microbiome you and you're just targeting
the tumor cells and getting rid of them
and you're making the rest of the body
healthy the problem is what I'm saying
is not common knowledge right they're
not in the trenches like we are they're
not looking at what OT warberg did like
we did we actually followed exactly why
he made his mistakes why he was thrown
under the bus when everybody ran off
chasing jeans uh what were his kernels
of knowledge that he had that he could
share with us so we took what he knew
and we improved it and we showed where
others where he warberg himself and
others have made very similar kinds of
mistakes thinking that oxygen
consumption is always linked to
oxidative phosphorilation in a tumor
cell it's not and people need to know
that so uh the quantification that
warberg did based on his dramatic
training uh was not correct so we had to
clear up a lot of that mess so and now
the the science is solid so if people
want to challenge it let them do the
same experiments and see see if they get
something different so um but I don't
think they will if they do it the right
way yeah well said no your research has
been incredible you've really taken his
Oto warberg work and and extended it and
helping to achieve to reach more people
uh your book cancer has metabolic
disease I admit when I read it um a few
years ago it was very difficult read for
me and I had to read it a few times
times and I started to get it a really
Incredible Book uh that you have out
there do you plan on writing a new book
well you know they've been asking me
because right now it's selling more like
like more than it's ever sold yeah
that's awesome awes yeah you know I'm
shocked myself um but I want to
emphasize that I only wrote one book uh
and all these others that are coming
around with my name on it as if I wrote
it is not true is that happening huh
yeah yeah we have Pirates out there
taking our stuff um you know not that
they not that they're putting wrong
information out there but but like the
charity Channel and all these things um
we our research is driven by
philanthropy and private foundations
okay uh we get money from people who who
want to participate in the Paradigm
change to say uh my help we help this
whole shift uh and we just feel good
about that some people say I don't need
to know that my investment is going to
bring me back a greater uh return on my
investment we just want to know that
we're participating in something
massively important for the health of
for the health and what I do like when
they make a a nice gift to us um in the
next paper I write in the
acknowledgement section you'll see the
name of that person so when you read our
papers uh Open Access anybody can read
them you know because I can't say
everything in just a conversation you
got to look at the data and read the
words that we wrote um you see the names
who the hell are all these people
like this guy here this name of this guy
those are the guys that have supported
our research that's cool that's great
that you do that so so uh yeah so if you
want to feel good and you get your name
on a scientific publication in the
acknowledgements so you say my God look
at all these different names that he's
got in here and then we have a few
foundations of course and don't forget
and then NIH supported our research
years ago um when I was doing things
that had no real clinical practical
application pure basic science they were
support that but as soon as you start
stepping out of the the tro into the
into the Big World oof you got to be
real careful when you say cancer is not
a genetic you know you're not you're not
gonna last long yeah I'm sure you've
taken some heat for that well you know
and they can say what they want to say I
I I I rest my my case on the science you
know I I'm not the opinions that I have
are all based on the experiments that I
did next door repeat it over and over
again you know so you'll hear people say
oh his work hasn't been repeated are you
kidding me why don't you read the damn
article see how many times it repeated
those things and all all the other
people that did the work the nuclear
transfer experiments well they did 70
times and each one of these times of
tumors got the same results give me a
break this has all been repeated over
and over again over and over again and
oh well if if it's important I would
have heard about it well maybe
not apparently not apparently not where
can my audience go to find your research
maybe donate and and contribute to the
cause yeah well I think um uh we get
direct uh in my in my bio biology web
page at Boston College in the biologies
dep Department there's a donation button
uh and the university uh I cannot accept
money when I if if someone gives me a
check like I got a check for $10,000 one
time can you believe this so I mailed it
to Travis christopherson's
Foundation uh for metabolic cancer
therapies and Travis christopherson's
Foundation supports us so I give the
money if I get money I give it to the to
Travis's Foundation because we have a a
a grant set up from his foundation to
Boston College got it so it's the
university who gives the money to me
never me directly getting money from
anybody and that's another thing it
comes through legitimate channels from
from the University itself so they can
either donate to me through my biology
web page or through Travis
christopherson's and we do write grants
to private foundations we got a a very
significant amount of money from the
United Kingdom Childhood Cancer uh
program great we got one of the few
grants from an American getting a grant
from the British but we developed now a
therapy for childhood high-grade gomas
that we're getting ready to put out in a
big way which is another tragic tragic
situation but we developed a a pediatric
high-grade Goma uh experimental system
using mice that have high-grade gomas
and we put them in in the brains of very
young mice and got the same kind of
phenotype that you see in children with
high-grade gomas spinal cord involvement
which kills a lot of little kids and we
were able to use our our our diet drug
cocktail metabolic therapy to really get
tremendous extension of survival of
these mice so clearly this is going to
have a major impact in the clinic but
the problem the problem is they don't do
that it's not part of the standard of
Care standard of care says surgical
debulking radiation and chemo it's not
metabolic therapy so even when you have
this that could save the lives of these
little kids it's not being it's not
being used which is a tragedy you know
but we're going to continue to do it
because it's going to work and kids are
going to survive and live longer with a
higher quality of life right on oh right
on so good we're going to put everything
that you mentioned those resources in
the notes down below for anybody
watching and listening last thing I want
to ask you here Professor C for I always
end my conversations with with gratitude
I I call it vitamin G my favorite
vitamin in the world vitamin
gratitude um the state of of of
gratefulness what it does to lower your
cortisol levels increase dopamine
oxytocin just helps you feel good I want
to ask you what do you have vitamin G
gratitude for today today Professor C
fre well today I mean I'm speaking to
you aren't I yes you
are all right so um no no we we we I
enjoy what I do I teach the students and
I have two big classes cancer General
General biology to 100 students and then
we have the metabol cancer is a
metabolic disease so kids are getting
all fired up about it um they want to
hear more about it where there's a lot
of people emailing me young people from
different universities they want to know
more they want to get involved in the
movement it's a movement uh it's a
knowledge movement it's a health
movement basically so uh um because
these young people know you know they're
they're worried about climate change
they see the Obesity epidemic they see
people getting sick and they don't want
to be part of that so they want to make
the change young people have to jump on
board here yeah because the go the rest
of us you know we're going to be
dissipated here after a while but uh but
but anyway yeah and they want to stay as
healthy as they possibly can for a
variety of reasons but you're right
about the Gratitude and that's one of
the things that happiness and enjoyment
of life will reduce
you know and we all have our ways to to
reduce stress uh I like to go out
fishing on the lake when there's I don't
listen to any cell phones I'm not I
don't have earplugs I don't do any of
that disconnected I just like to be back
in nature and listen to the birds and
all the animals that and everything
that's out there so um it brings you
back and it's very soothing actually um
you're out there in a whole lake all by
yourself you know and it's just quite
and then you come back in the lab and
you kill
tumor what a
contrast but it's a lot of fun doing
that as well yes your well your work is
incredible I've I've learned so much
from you over the years it's been an
honor I'm so glad we finally made this
happen as I mentioned to you earlier
well you know I I I know parts of my
book can be challenging as you said but
I you have to write to the scientists as
well um because the
scientists uh the a lot of that
information in the book was coming from
the research that we did here next door
in my lab so uh we did the controlled
experiments we did all that and I
understand some parts of it like are
over the head of people but there are
chapters in the book that anybody can
read yeah um uh so it's kind of it's a
hodg podge of things I did the best I
could in ordering this in the way I
thought it should have been ordered um
but it was the first shots the only
major book written on cancer is a
metabolic
disease um and uh you know it's the I I
don't know maybe others are trying to do
it but but uh I'm still battling with
the with the cancer field itself uh
thinking that cancer cells uh use fatty
acids for energy that um oxygen
consumption is linked to oxidated
phosphorilation this is not not correct
completely so we we still have a lot of
convincing to do of people that call
themselves metabolic gurus of cancer but
they I'm telling you they're so yolked
that the neck because they know they if
they say cancer is not a genetic disease
that noose becomes a lot tighter right
they have to walk this fine line I don't
have to worry about that I don't I'm not
worried about losing uh a multi-million
dollar Grant from the National Cancer
Institute I don't have a multi-million
dollar Grant right from the national I
don't you can't lose something you don't
have the only thing I have is scientific
truth that's the only thing I have
respect and so so we'll keep pushing
ahead
and hopefully the change will come for
those poor souls that are dying from
this disease if you enjoyed that
interview with Dr Thomas SE freed make
sure you watch a recent interview I just
published with Dr William Lee about
harmful foods that feed cancer and
disease so I'm not saying yogurt's bad
I'm saying yogurt's good however the
blueberry your favorite yogurt there's
like a band of jelly so you open it up
you Stir It Up and now you've got your
blueberry lowfat yogurt good for you
right you got berries you got lowfat
wrong